Sentences for language learning in English and Vosa	 Lusasi for vos apdav mu eng a vosa 
Good morning! I'm Veikko Pyhtilä from Finland.	Hava entan! Aj oo Veikko Pyhtilä ut Finlo.
I have developed Vosa, an easy, regular, artificial language that I am teaching you now.	Aj oo deeven Vosa, gnova, pöregliva, tevos, ko aj padaav tu jasi nen.
I form sentences from the most common Finnish words to the rarest ones.	Aj kautee lusasi ut tihnast fin sasi tu hitnast.
However, sometimes rarer words are included in sentences.	Amut, välna hitnapir sasi inoofta in lusasi.
To be, I am, you are, he/she is, we are, you are, they are.	Oo, aj oo, ja oo, hä oo, ajsi oo, jasi oo, häsi oo
Am I, are you, is he, is we, are you, are they?	Ooko aj, ooko ja, ooko hä, ooko ajsi, ooko jasi, ooko häsi?
Be, let be, let us be, be, let them be!	Oo ja, oo hä, oo ajsi, oo jasi, oo häsi!
I was, you were, he/she was, we were, you were, they were.	Aj ooen, ja ooen, hä ooen, ajsi ooen, jasi ooen, häsi ooen.
I have been, I had been	Aj oo ooen, aj ooen ooen
I would be, you would be, he/she would be, we would be, you would be, they would be	Aj ooif, ja ooif, hä ooif, ajsi ooif, jasi ooif, häsi ooif
Don't do it! Don't go there!	Ej ja tee it! Ej jasi tuu itle!
to exist	oo oonen
 I have to go to the store. I must do it.	Aj piit tuu fäflo. Aj piit tee it.
What do you do for work? What is your name? Where are you from? Can you speak English?	Ko ja tee mu tö? Ko oo jaof ersa? Kout ja oo? Davooko ja sasaa eng?
Yes, I can speak. I can only speak a little. No, I can not.	Je aj davoo. Aj davoo sasaa erisli ipri. Ej, aj ej davoo.
Are you at all interested in Vosa, whose words are logically derived from basic concepts and mainly also from shortened root words of Finnish and English?	Ooko ja ejri ruhamiien öb vosa, ko-of sasi oo tuvisdali deriiven ob besvososi a päsoli ali ob fin a eng uulen jursasi.
 There are few word inflections in Vosa, for example the plural is expressed with the -si ending.	Sasi tesakauutesi oo in vosa ipri, edkali sisakau kautsaata vy -si önrupa.
Opposites have been formed by reversing the order of the letters from beginning to end or from end to beginning or with the suffix -ej.	Ögiplosi oo kautee-en vy töön kirkasi jär ut nö tu ön taj ut ön tu nö taj vy ej-rupa.
one, many, big, small, good, bad, long, short, possible, impossible	is, si, piva, ipva, hava, ahva, luva , ulva, vova, ejvova
Adjectives have -va suffix. Verbs are formed with a doubled vowel.	Vasasi oof -va derusa. Tesasi kauteeta vy duuen vou.
Adverbs "how" are formed from adjectives with -li suffix and -va-suffix is removed.	Lilonosasi "koli" kauteeta ut adjectives vi -li suffix a -va suffix yraapta.
To be, to do, to go, to come, to sit, to stand, to lie, to work, to have hobby.	Oo, tee, tuu, uut, siit, tiis, leioo, töö, mitee.
This, that, that, these, those, those.	Tä, ät, it, täsi, ätsi, itsi.
Me and you. I am Finnish, I am not a foreigner.	Aj a ja. Aj oo finjo, aj ej oo nihyjjo.
Do you know the person walking over there?	Kavodaako ja hojo, kojo vetuu ätla?
This is a green car that I bought already 23 years ago.	Täin oo grinva tuvö, ko aj ääfen ripnen 23 (dubastre) jänsi iten.
Are you okay (well)? Can you help me?	Vooko ja hali? Vooko ja vyy aj?
Can I have a piece of salmon?	Aafko aj ikob sälmfis?
I would buy a house with a garden, but I can't afford it.	Aj ääfif tol vi tolsieplo, mut aj ej ritsoof for it (mut aj ej oof resrosi for it)
Let's talk about what spit brings to the mouth, wood or hay.	Sasaata ko salivmo intu moup aag, pu taj hep.
It's just that we are getting closer to death day by day.	It jusli oo, syt ajsi autrafpiir tu eön tan ut tan.
When we die, there are only two options for where we will end up, heaven or hell, which is true even if you don't believe it.	Na ajsi eöön, oo erisli du tajifosi, kotu ajsi auttuu önutli, halo taj ahlo, ko oo daril, tajli ja ej intu it uus.
Come along for a walk in nature. Bring your friends too, so we can go as a group.	Uut ja tuvi le turou biolo. Aap ja ali vijosi tuvi, itli ajsi voo tuu li josio.
Have one or two or even all of these sweets, but save however your teeth and be careful of too much energy.	Aap ja ut tä is taj du taj tajli ki täsi suitemsi, mut ropaoo ja amut jaof bitvesi a riskkaa ja ylri pori.
Time is passing quickly, it's time to go home.	No noriip nopli, oo no urtuu (tuu) bal.
 This shirt is too big for me.	Tä ylvat oo for aj ylrili piva.
May I ask how old you are? What year and where were you born?	Aafko aj koo, siko jänsi unva ja oo? Na ko jän a koin ja oo nöee-en?
Let's run a race, who will be the first to win? Who will finish second, who will finish third?	Tyyta vintra, kojo oo isva, viin? Kojo aftuu li duva, kojo li treva intu oblo?
I don't think any other language is as easy as Vosa, once you delve into the logic of Vosa. Then you can even derive new words yourself.	Öb aj ejö tua vos oo li gnova li vosa, na ja autdippiir intu vosa tuvisda. Itna voo jea aut deriiv novva sasi.
However, even in an easy, sufficiently usable language, there is a lot of word learning involved.	Amut, jea gnova a hanidriva teovova vos oof piri sasi siapdaavte.
What gift should I give her? Give her even thought a fruit basket, she'll probably be pleased (happy)  when she gets it.	Ko tofa aj faaif tu hä? Faa ja tu hä tajli hednetboks, hä oone mejvarmli nidfulcuva (rosva), na hä aaf it.
What do you like? Do I have to go there? Hold on to this!	Koöb ja öbraa? Piitko aj tuu itle? Paoo ja ru tä!
What do you do for work? What would we do tomorrow when we have free time?	Ko ja tee mu jaof tö! Ko ajsi teeif detanna, na ajsi oof frino?
Is he already aware of this this matter?	Ooko hä ripnen öbvodava tä so?
You don't even have to learn Vosaa terribly, if you just start speaking and writing using good, free online dictionaries and read a little Vosa grammar: Lot of learning material	Vosa ej niid hirli ipripstli siapdaav, na erisli nötee sasaa a kiir teooli vosa hava, ejrovriva vinet sakirtosi a riik ipri vosa vosdav. Piri davmo
Now it's time to take a break and also eat some packed lunch.	Nen oo no paoo välno a ali eem ipri bägviem.
Say the sentence again, I didn't quite understand what you meant.	Saa ja lusa novli, aj ej dakavooen fulli ko ja obmaarken. 
However, in today's international world, it is necessary to know other languages, even if you are fluent in your native language.	Amut in nenva hyjsivälva köl oo nidva davoo ali tua vossi, tajli ja oo havotuuva in jaof ofvos.
You can borrow these books.	Ja voo lonroaap täsi kirtosi.
Do you wear glasses when you are driving a car?	Teooko ja kaevglasi na ja katuu tuvö?
If I were a billionaire, I would hire employees to take the site forward with good educational materials, advertisements, courses, and to polish and expand Vosa even better.	If aj ooif gusrovjo, aj töroovif tööjosi gaa vosa eddir vi hava davmosi, kädtosi, davhäpsi a  hiee a leileipiir vosa pirnen hapir.
Let's stay on topic, let's be realistic, yet optimistic, and not too pessimistic.	Autpaoota in so, oota rilidejosi, amut hastcujosi, a ej ylrili ahstcujosi.
What is the most important thing on your mind right now?	Ko oo curost so in jaof mi jusna nen?
Which countries have you traveled to? Do you own land? Land is the opposite of sky and sea.	Koin hylsi ja oo rotuuen? Ööfko ja mol? Mol oo ögiplo of yllo a fovamlo (Mol oo yllo a fovamlo ögiplo).
First we eat, then we take a lunch rest in bed.	Isvana eemta (ajsi eem), itne paoota (ajsi aap) emet in nukos.
A long time ago, my ancestors lived in this area.	Luna iten, ajof enenmamsi elooen la tä leilo.
Take your buckets with you to the forest if we find a good spot for berries and mushrooms.	Aap jasi pogagvessi tuvi intu pul, if ajsi kees hava bersi a fungsi iplo.
Humans are distinguished from animals in that they have an immortal soul, are responsible for their actions, and are significantly more intelligent than animals.	Mäm autervokaa ut pe itin, syt mäm oof eöönejva hoj a mäm oo in okofo öb häof tesi a mäm oo pivokali vovispir il pesi.
Just a little longer and the end of the world or World War III could come, only the Lord knows.	Pirnen ipri no a voo uut kölön taj treva kölsip, Romä isvi daa it.
Some people may not believe in the spiritual world matters.	Ösi mämsi meej ej uus intu hoköl sosi.
This is my own idea. What new has happened?	Tä oo ajof öfva idea. Ko novva oo hääpen?
During the day we usually work or do our hobbies and at night we sleep.	Tanna (na tan) tihna ajsi töö taj mitee a natna (na nat) ajsi nuuk.
Good night! Same to you!	Hava nat! Re tu jasi!
I designed it all myself.	Aj oo kasooen it fulli (ki) aut.
Finland is the happiest country in the world, but even here there are many unsolved problems.	Finlo oo kölof sakst hyl, amut ali täin oo piri gnooejva ongsi.
Good and evil are fundamental concepts of existence.	Hava a ahva oo oovao besvososi.
Do the job as well as possible!	Tuöntee ja tö vostli hali! (Tee ja tö li hali li vova!)
Many people don't feel like studying languages at all, even though studying is good brain exercise.	Si ej ratee apdaav vossi jusna ejri, tajli apdav oo ali hava daevpou.
Number words: One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, twenty, one hundred, one thousand, one million, one billion.	Siösasi: Is, du, tre, kva, fiv, sik, sev, aht, nin, bas, basis, basdu, dubas, ces, dis, fos, gus.
Where would we go tomorrow? My son will be going to primary school in the first grade at the end of the summer.	Kotu tuuifta (tuuifko ajsi) detanna. Ajof son tuune besdavlo le isva paersio na önlakno.
Some small bug (insect) has stuck to my neck.	Ö ipva peg oo aptaarten tu ajof denekve.
That kind of thing comes by chance and happens.	Itva saat a hääp.
How are you? This secret doesn't belong to you.	Ko le ja obhöö? (Koli ja oo?) Tä dahidvao ej tuoof ja.
I ate well, work is about to start (soon will work begin).	Aj eemen hali, tö rafnöönen (ipne nöö tö).
Can you see these small letters well?	Vokaako ja hali täsi ipva kirkasi?
After the run, I take a shower.	Ne turou aj tuu (intu) tset (aj aap tset).
Tomorrow is men's evening.	Detanna oo mäsiof ennat.
Do you have a habit of regularly attending an event?	Oofko ja lio uttuu regli in ö häp?
The new year is about to begin. I'm going to start casting tin.	Ipne nöö novva jän. Aj nöö kauvopaa moSn.
Have you learned a lot about Vosa?	Ooko ja daaven piri vosa?
Here's some tea and a cake for you, take, please!	Täin oo öri teavem a bekto tu ja, aap ja, oo ja hava!
This is how it happened, first I got a phone call and then I completely forgot the about it.	Täli it hääpen, isvana uuten visavööte a itne aj öösen so kioli.
Someone called me from a fake company, but I figured it was phishing.	Ö hojo visavööen tu aj ut tarrosao tralö, mut aj dakavooen it mu dasi fiiste.
Let's not go there, let's go here, okay?	Ej tuuta itle, mut tuuta täle, tusoopko (haklir)?
He mentioned a little about it, but not in more detail.	Hä issaaen ipri öb it, mut ej tarkpirli.
No matter how much you own, you can waste it all and then be without property and penniless.	Tajli ja ööfif koli piri, ja voo ahöfriip ki it a oo itne resroejva a rovejva.
Different people like different things and value things with different weights.	Er mämsi öbraa er sosi a rocuu sosi vy er hevrosi.
What does the painting represent? What suggestions did he make?	Ko volkato edtukaa? Ko tajsasi hä edtusaaen?
 The whole work day was busy.	Kio tötan ooen iprinova.
By the way, what size are your pants so that these old unused ones will fit you?	Tuali, ko pipri oo jaof harvat, syt tusoopko täsi vonva ejteooen tu ja?
Do you believe in God? Yes, God exists, such an organized creation could not have come about by chance.	Uusko ja intu Hajo? Je, Hajo oo oonen, ej täli lijärva novteosio voo nöee satli.
If you have any questions, I'd be happy to answer them.	If jasi oof kootesi, itli aj ook intu itsi mihali.
Is this possible? Are your adult children already working or are they still studying?	Ooko tä vova? Uttuuko jaof fuljosi ipmämsi in tösi taj apdaavko häsi pirnen?
People used to have less free time than they do today.	En mämsi oofen rip frino il nenna.
Should I stay home or should I go with you?	Jääko aj in bal taj urtuuifko aj tuvi?
Be diligent so that you don't fall behind others in your studies.	Oo ja piriteva, syt ja ej nejääif ut tuasi in jaof apdavsi.
What's on your mind? Do you feel like this food?	Ko oo in jaof mi? Oofko ja miofra tä em?
He was in a good mood.	Hä oofen hava mi.
Who would you like to go on a trip with?	Vi kojo ja ofraaif urtuu rotuo?
 When will he come home?	Kona hä uut bal?
He ate a large portion because he was so hungry.	Hä eemen piva riem, syfor ooen itli emnidva.
The letter C is pronounced as a voiced ace in the vowel, like this [z].	C-kirka sahööta in vosa li cöyhva s, syklirli täli [z].
There is still heavy traffic there.	Itla oo pirnen kamva littusta.
It could be that he is sick if he doesn't come.	Meej oo itli, syt hä oo retmuuen, na hä ej uut.
I'll take him to the train station.	Aj vigaane hä le fetultol.
I can't eat this, it makes me sick (makes me vomit).	Aj ej karmitee eem tä, aj emyöktee.
There can always come also setbacks (adversities).	Kina voo uut ali ahöghäpsi.
Look, what's over there?	Kaa ja, ko ätla oo?
I had to leave halfway through (not ready to go away).	Aj autpiiten urtuu ejteful yr.
The grain is doing well this summer.	Vilem autnotuu hali na tä lakno.
I don't know that. Do you know what this costs?	Aj ej daa it. Daako ja, ko tä rovrii?
He can no longer walk dozens of kilometers at a time because he is already so old.	Hä ejpirnen povoo vetuu bassi dismetrsi isnoli, syfor hä oo ripnen itli unva.
There were still a lot of people in the countryside when I was a child and young person. Now the cities have grown too much.	Itna ooen la nuatlo pirnen piri jori, na aj ooen ipmäm a nuva. Nen taunsi oo piiren ylrili.
Do you know that person? Does your heart feel pain?	Kavodaako ja ät hojo? Fiiko jaof hemoev ahfi?
Shall we go visiting?	Urtuutako situtoo?
I need to get in, do you have a spare key?	Aj piit aftuu intu, oofko ja reslukvo?
It's already half past twelve, it's getting busy.	Novo oo ripnen duik is, uutnen iprino.
Let's buy half a kilo of apples!	Ääfta duik disgram äplhedsi!
You don't necessarily need all the things when you're a minimalist.	Ki oftosi ej nidli niidta, na oota ripstidejo.
 That's exactly what I meant.	Jusli it aj obmaarken.
Beetroot is said to help keep capillaries in good condition, according to a health claim.	Redjurep meej vyy for ipgagev hava vosta vili ö terlijesa.
I took a lot of pictures from my nature trip, do you want to see them?	Aj aapen piri katosi ut ajof biolo nirotuo, ofraako ja vokaa itsi?
There's too many things for learning in one go.	Itin ooen ylrili piri sosi for apdaav na isno.
Life is precious, even if it has problems, there is however a solution to most of them, so you can survive.	Eo oo rova, tajli it oofif ongsi, for itsi amut sipir autkees gno, syt ja autvokliir.
One picture can speak more than a thousand words.	Is kato voo sasaa pir il dis sasi.
This kind is my apartment, you can come and visit.	Täva oo ajof elo, jasi voo uut a isuttuu.
He declared the treatment successful.	Hä darilkasaaen hake mu saaken.
Let this be the last time I smoke a cigarette.	Oo tä önva isno, na aj teböön tobepto.
Like I said, he doesn't want to talk about it.	Li aj saaen, hä ej ofraa sasaa öb it.
Do we need to buy such a large number of Christmas presents?	Niidko ajsi ääf ätli piri jultofasi.
Many people don't eat healthily, don't exercise enough, and don't get enough sleep, which is why they often get sick.	Sirisi ej eem forterli, ej mitee uuteo hanidri a ej nuuk hanidri, itsy häsi retmuu sina.
Popular opinion is not always correct.	Tihnava micu ej kina oo ratli.
I was about to forget an important task.	Aj ooen fulli rafli öös curova teob.
In this case, we need to act like this.	In tä obhäp ajsi piit otee täli.
Furthermore, I will say this, bad morals will destroy society, at least in the long run.	Pirobli aj saa tä, ahvova cuhah telyreek visoslo ripstli na luva teobkavo.
Where is the nearest hospital?	Koin oo rafst retlö?
Attention, there's an ambulance coming at high speed.	Obtark, ätel uut rettuvö vy ipnanopri.
Don't be so stupid! It will cost up to a million euros to implement.	Ej ja tee ätli sivli! It rilteete uutne rovrii jea sujli fos eurovsi.
How far is it from here to the city?	Koli luva rotuo täut oo pirnen tu taunlo?
Who is that woman?	Kojo ät äm oo?
What is the cause of this accident?	Ko oo sy intu tä kas?
There are still a lot of people here.	Täla oo pirnen piri jori.
What is most important to you in your life?	Ko oo tu ja curost in jaof eo?
Let everyone express their opinion.	Kijosi öbsasaa hä häof micu.
He'll be here soon. This place is dirty.	Ipne hä uut. Tä iplo oo autniilken.
Which of the boys is taller?	Dutajko oo ob sonsi lupir?
Don't you have any interest in any language?	Ejöko vos ruhamii ja?
Yes, peace of soul is important to me.	Je hoj pis oo tu aj curova.
Is the idea possible to implement?	Ooko idea vova riltee?
A company must achieve a good enough result to stay afloat.	Tralö piit aaf hanidriva hava utro for (syt it) autpaoo tisdirli.
The world is pretty bad.	Köl oo rafli ahva.
Which path will you take if you want to be saved?	Luvi ko tul ja tuut, if ja ofraa authovyy?
Who is affected? Don't touch it!	Kojosi so obtaat? Ej ja obtaat it!
Connection with the church and others is important for gaining strength in life.	Vio intu usdil a tuasi oo curova, syt aaf po intu eo.
How have you had time to do so many things?	Koli ja oo novooen tee täli piri sosi?
Water is essential for life.	Vam oo for eo nidva.
This area is zoned for industry.	Tä leilo oo telikaaen for tolövao.
We often spend too much time on social media.	Sina ajsi oo ylrili piri in sosva dafafvo.
It usually helps to get things done when you prioritize them.	Tihna vyy novoo, na paa sosi intu curojär.
The gospel is the power of God for salvation to every believer.	Rossa oo Hajo-of po for ki uusjo mu pyhrosvao.
Where do you get the strength to cope with work and studies?	Kout ja aaf po for povoote in tö a apdav?
He can't see small print clearly without glasses.	Hä ej vokaa soklirli ejli kaevglasi ipva utkakir.
When was he born?	Kona hä oo nöee-en?
This shows that climate change has progressed in recent decades.	Tä tukaa, syt homstamuo oo edtuuen na edönva jänbassi.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.	Romä rak oo visvao nö.
I am the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end.	Aj oo A a O, nö a ön.
What activities does the association do?	Ko oteete oof sossio?
It's the weekend again. Have a nice weekend!	Anen oo gunön. Hava gunön!
 PART 2	IK 2
Vocabulary can seem difficult when the words are still strange.	Vosa voo oblikaa ongva, na sasi oo pirnen ejvikadava.
Show me the light so I can better open the screw in that awkward spot.	Tekaa ja kat, syt aj aaf hapirli ouup ruv ut ongvova lo.
What would we do next?	Ko ajsi teeif mu deva?
We give (put) and take with our hands, and we go and come with our feet.	Vy pave paata a aapta a vy tuve tuuta a uutta.
I am authentic Finnish and he is Swedish.	Aj oo finfinjo a hä oo svidva.
Now is the right time to hear what it means for employment.	Nen oo ratva ipno vohöö, ko it obroo töfari miculi (for töfari).
First turn right, go one block forward and then turn left.	Auttöön ja isvana tu vel, tuu ja is taunlaori eddir a auttöön ja itne tu lev.
At the very least, the room needs to be vacuumed and the tables wiped, even if the floor isn't yet washed or the rugs outside are dusted.	Ripstli tolik piit imvöö a laossi vaap, tajli lytal ej pirnen vooshta a ej tomhääkta matsi ni.
Cities, municipalities and the state are heavily in debt and have been living beyond their means for decades.	Taunlosi, dilsi a pöhyl oo errili pitrovva, oo ee-en ylli resrosi jänbassi.
He aspires to go to university, where he can do research, but what kind of skills does it require?	Hä tutraa yldavlö, itla voo tee dakasi, mut ko davoote it teniid.
These places should be marked on the map.	Täsi losi piitif maark intu kaloto.
The task is beyond our capabilities, we need help.	Teob tuu ylli posi, ajsi niid vyo.
How many chapters is that in the book? Seven, as far as I know, is the number of a liar and perfection.	Sivako rikik it oo in kirto? Sev oo ajof hastdali siö of lirsaajo a fulvovao.
Communication, speeches, writings, examples can influence other people, their opinions, society, decisions, learning outcomes, attitudes, etc.	Vy tusaate, sasasi, kirsi, edkasi voo yys tu tua mämsi, häsiof micusi, visoslo, pätsi, daavte utrosi, tucusi aid. (a itli depirna)
Many videos may seem great on the surface (superficially, externally) with their graphics, but their content is not that rewarding and valuable.	Si kahöto voo oblikaa eldirtu (laosidli, nili) väkava vi itof katodasi, mut itof inob ej oo a itli farova a rova.
Why would we need an international language that is easier and faster to learn? At the very least, it would save time studying the language, avoid misunderstandings due to the ambiguity of words, and make the work of machine translators easier.	Kofor niidifta gnopirli a noppirli daatava hyjsivälva vos? Ripstli ropaooifta no in vos apdav, auturpiitifta tarlivosootesi syfor sasi silidakaavova a vosmuuvösi te ooif gnopir.
There are times when you are quite busy and don't have time to produce publications with sufficient quality and care.	Nosi oo, kona oo rafli iprino a ej novoo tee dihpatosi hanidriva havaoli a juskeeli.
Is the machine working? Now we need to act quickly to get the injured person to the hospital.	Oteeko vö? Nen piit otee nopli, syt aafta autterreeken hojo intu retlö.
Helsinki is the capital of Finland. I have lived there for about ten years.	Helsink oo Finlo pätaunlo. Aj oo elooen itla rafli bas jänsi.
On what basis did Russia supposedly have the right to attack Ukraine with armed forces and cause great destruction to the infrastructure, killing and wounding both its own citizens and Ukrainians by the hundreds of thousands?	Kovy bessy Ruslo oo lije oofen rataf postuu vy sutsipvo posi intu Ukrainlo a tee tu sivovötol piva kirek, tuapaeöön a laevreek duvio öfva hyjjosi a ukrainjosi li cessi dissi?
Knowledge is power, knowledge is strength, the people are become noble by knowledge.	Da pö, da po, hyj da väjomuuen.
What is your name, first and last name? What is his/her name?	Ko oo jaof ersa, edersasi a cejersa? Ko hä oo ersaaen?
I'm counting the total. The children toboggan down the hill in Shrovetide. Lower the blinds on the window so it's not dazzling! Let him go already!	Aj risoo önsumri. Ipmämsi lytuu na Lytuono möyl. Lypaa katyvvo in kauv, syt ej ahkliir! Fatuu hä ripnen!
He was Viljo, or nicknamed Ville. He lived to be 67 years old.	Hä ooen Viljo, taj tukooersaaen Ville. Hä ee-en mu 67-jänriva (sikbassev) ättu.
He may not come to the party because he has many obstacles.	Hä ej mejli uut rono, syfor hä oof piri yvsi.
The church is often in the middle of a village or town. 	Ustol oo sina midin ustolcel taj taunlo.
Is the law still in effect? What new law has replaced it? The top of the mountain seems to be without a tree.	Ooko pöso pirnen in po? Ko novva pöso oo sijfaaen it? Ylstlo of pimöyl oblikaa oo puejva.
How are you feeling now? Do you feel a pain in your head?	Ko ja nen livofii? Livofiiko ahfi in jaof pä?
He joined the association. What is the matter related to?	Hä rutuuen sossio. Kointu so rutuu?
Some larger nations want to dictate to smaller nations, even though all people should be equal.	Ösi pipir hyjsi ofraa pösaa ippir hyjsi, tajli ki mämsi piitif oo talrova.
Cars include, among others, passenger car, lorry, truck, bus, van, ambulance and taxi.	Tuvösi oo intuasi hojotuvö, lodtuvö, lugatuvö, simoltuvö, siotuvö, päktuvö, rettuvö a tiftuvö.
 Are the rules easy to understand in detail? They have many sections.	Ooko pöregsi gnova dakavoo luufli, itsi oof si kiröiksi (pösoiksi).
I have read quite a lot of information from different fields. I does not in earnest develop Vosa, for fun and also seriously.	Aj oo riiken rafli piri ut er leiobsi öbda. Aj ejgrerilli deev vosa, for ajof hehob a ali grerilli.
There are countless books that I haven't read and never intend to read.	Oo risoejva kirtosi, kosi aj ej oo riiken a aj nesoo ejna riik a.
Set theory deals with various sets and calculates with them.	In siodav cuteeta erva siosi a risoota vy itsi.
This plant only occurs in Lapland. Who performed at the spring festival?	Tä ep kauut erisli in Laplo. Kojosi autedtukaaen in enlaknorono?
You should think more thoroughly first and only then speak or act. Thinking consumes energy, it requires glucose in the brain.	Piitif soo beslipir isvana a saa taj otee denen itne. Soote teroriip pori, for it niidta glukosmo in daevsi.
There is someone, is it a Christmas elf or a troll?	Itla oo öjo, ooko it julielönhätjo taj troljo?
How many municipalities are there in Finland? Which parish and diocese or clique (faction, coterie) do you belong to, or do you not belong to any?	Siko dilsi oo in Finlo? Ko usdil a usgul taj ängsio ja tuoof taj ejkointu?
What is your opinion on the matter? The heel of my shoe has come off, I'm going to the shoemaker. My heels are sore (have gone to the wounds), I'm going to lubricate them.	Ko oo jaof micu intu so? Ajof tuveto pirtap oo uuren, aj tuu tuvetoojo. Ajof tuvepäsi oo laevautreeken, aj oilpaa itsi.
Matti is building a detached house. Quarrel breaks, love builds.	Matti tool öfbaltol. Pos reek, ra tool.
War causes a lot of suffering, destruction and also environmental problems. Why are authoritarian rulers so crazy that they don't care about the opinions of ordinary citizens and force them to go to war through violence, fear and propaganda, driven by their desires and obsessions?	Sip syy piri saf, kirek a ali raulo-ongsi. Kosy autgöpöva pöpaoojosi oo itli sivcuova, syt häsi ej forkee öb resiva hyjjosi micusi a tepiit popitpöli, vy rak a ahdayste siip katuuen vy häof miofrasi a pitmisi.
It has been almost 2000 years since Jesus was crucified and resurrected. Will He soon come to earth for the second time?	Ut Jesus krosrupiikte a eönyylte oo noriipen ipne 2000 (dudis) jänsi. Ripnenko Hä ipne uut duva isno le mol?
If there is no reliable data to process, artificial intelligence is not a smart assistant.	If ej oo uscuva öbdasi tu cutee, tevis ej oo vovisva vyojo.
How are you? Nothing special. How about you?	Ko obhöö? Ejö eröva. Ako tu ja?
Mr. and Mrs. Virtanen go to a restaurant to eat because they don't feel like cooking good food themselves on each other's birthday.	Romä a roäm Virtanen tuu roemlo eem, na häsi ej na tuaof nöetan ratee aut emtoo hava em.
Why are there tides and ebbs (high tides and low tides) in the ocean? Because the moon's gravity affects them. I did it for her.	Kosy oo yylvamno a lyyvamno in fovamlo? Itsy, na monlo poagpo yys intu itsi. Aj tee-en it syfor hä.
How many people, participants, were there at the housing association meeting? Only a few, I think it was 9.	Siko hojosi, ikaapjosi ooen in tolvirosio visahäp? Erisli ipsi, mejli ooen 9 (nin).
Who was elected chairman? How many were against the proposal, how many were in favor of it?	Kojo apkaaenta mu sasadiirjo? Siko ooen ög tajsa, siko gö it?
 Here is an example of how with diligence you can learn a language well in school and with self-study, even with mediocre intelligence.	Täin oo edka ob it, syt vy piritevao voo daav vos hali in davlo a vy autapdav, ali vy midlivova vovisvao.
What time do you get out of bed in the morning and what time do you go to bed at night? Prices have risen and the value of money has fallen.	Kona yyl ja ut nukos yltu entanna a kona tuu ja nuuk ennatna? Rovrisi oo yylen a rov ro oo lyyen.
How to do it? By first downloading the program from the internet, installing the program, and running the program with these parameters.	Koli it teeta? Itli, syt utloodta vinet isvana prog, forlopaata prog a katuuta prog vi täsi muriosi.
How is your health, your well-being now? How is the economy? Is there still room there? I lived on a farm as a child. Put the new part in place of the old one!	Koli oo jaof tersta, fivoote nen? Kova oo rosta sta? Ooko itla pirnen til? Aj oo elooen na ipmäm la villö. Lopaa ja novva obik forsij vonva!
It wasn't until Midsummer that I made a birch whisk into the sauna, took a steam bath, and beat my body with the moistened birch whisk.	Denen midlakna aj tee-en lifhäkvo intu läktol, aapen läkvamhom a hääken ajof bodev vy votmuuen lifhäkvo.
What are your company's values? What do you value most, what are important to you in your life?	Kosi rosi oof jasiof tralö? Ko ja ristli rocuu, kosi oo tu ja curova in jaof eo?
 Time passes, clothes wear out, food wears out, money wears out.	No noriip, vatsi toriip, em toriip, rov roriip.
 What do you read, what kind of literature, magazines, websites?	Ko ja riik, kova kirsito, dapaprsi, vinetsidsi?
A researcher studies, conducts research, and even defends a doctoral thesis.	Dakaajo dakaa, tee daka a jea silijesaa mu gudavjo.
Replace the damaged product with a similar product! Who is your customer service representative?	Faa forsij autviiken to lireobva to! Kojo jasi oof sojoseerte ookva.
What do you give your dad for Father's Day and how do you celebrate it?	Ko ja faa tu jaof ma na Matan a koli jasi notee it?
Here are beautiful flowers growing, and there is a vegetable garden with vegetables and root crops growing, and in the garden there are berry bushes and fruit trees. Nowadays, savings don't grow much interest.	Täin eöpiir kava kuksi a ätla oo epmol, koin oo eöpiirnen grinemsi a juremsi a in tolsieplo oo berpupsi, hedpusi. Nenna ropaosi ej piir piri ylikrov.
Nowadays there are good opportunities to study languages, there are good learning materials online. It would be good to have conversation partners to converse with in Vosa.	Nenna oo hava vovaosi apdaav vossi, in vinet oo hava davmosi. Ooif hava aaf sasavijosi for visasaa mu vosa.
Making good courses and videos takes a lot of time. Take it when you go, bring it when you come!	Hava davhäpsi a kahötosi te gaa (aap) piri no. Gaa ja na ja tuu, aag ja na ja uut!
What position did he have in the competition? They had no place (space) in the inn, so they had to stay in the stable.	Sivako culo hä oofen in vintra? Häsi ei oofen til in iprotuotol, mut häsi autnotuuen intu popetol.
Where should this vase be placed? Where should the furniture be placed, table, chairs, bench, bed, cupboard, bookcase, armchairs, sofa?	Kotu tä kukves piitif lopaa? Kotu tolossi lopaata, laos, sitossi, lusitos, nukos, gabos, kirtogabtal, ögsupsitossi, makleisitos?
The government has fallen and a new one is being formed. Who will be the prime minister? What kind is the government program?	Pöjosio oo keiien a novva kauteeta. Kojo muune päpösiojo? Kova oo pöjosioprog?
Here is the user guide. Read it to find out how to get the best washing results for different types of clothes with your washing machine.	Täin oo teolida. Riik ja it koli ja aaf hast vooshte utro tu er vatvaosi vy vooshvö.
From example sentences, you learn about word usage contexts, word choices, and sentence structures.	Ob edkalusasi daav öb sasi teoviosi, sa-apkaatesi a lusalitolsi.
Who is ahead in line? Is the clock ahead, behind, or exactly on time? Look at the picture above!	Kojo tuut edla in tujär? Ooko novo edla taj dela taj tarkli ofna? Kaa ja edla oova kato!
Was the trip pleasant? How far (distance) is it from here to your home?	Ooenko hamiva rotuo? Koli luva farri täel oo tu jaof bal?
While I cook, I listen to the news and other current affairs programs.	Rena aj kuu em, aj höör novsasi a tua soprogsi.
There was a strong earthquake in the Pacific Ocean, which caused tsunamis. He is very strong and lifts weights (pounds). The sound is too loud, turn it down!	La Uohva Fovamlo ooen pova molpitär, ko syyen popiveivsi. Hä oo errili pova a sipayyl hevrivosi. Hö oo ylrili pova, paa it öhpir!
Dogs and cats are pets, among others. What other domestic animals do you have on the land?	Intuasi haupe a miupe oo rapesi. Kosi tua balpesi jasi oof la nuatlo?
You can remember Vosa words well when you become familiar with the basic concepts and root words, where the words are derived from, or when the words are remembered through sentence connections. You can also memorize words in different orders.	Vosa sasi söö hali, na vikadaa intu besvososi a jursasi, kout itof sasi oo deriiven taj ut lusaviosi autpolyy sasi intu mi. Voo ali siapdaav utsöli sasi in er järsi.
Many people wonder what the purpose of life is. It's not axiom (clear) to everyone yet.	Si josi öbsoo, ko obro of eo oo. It ej oo tu ki klirso pirnen.
I form sentences using common language expressions. Study groups could be formed to study Vosa.	Aj kautee lusasi for tihnavos kautsasi. Vooif kautee apdav iksiosi for vosa apdav.
It is difficult and time-consuming to develop a truly optimal language. But development is moving forward slowly and sometimes in leaps and bounds.	Oo ongva a noaapva deev rilli hastvosta hava vos. Mut dev tuu öhponli eddir a välna vy piva luvetuosi.
Young people had to leave home and go out into the world to study, work, and find a spouse as a life partner.	Nujosi piiten tejää bal a tuu le köl apdaav, tu tösi a kees vimäm mu eovijo.
The effect of the drug is very fast. Words have a great impact on others.	Termo ys oo errili nopva. Sasi oof piva ys tu tuasi.
Today the people of Finland celebrate Independence Day. Our mothers and fathers, i.e. our parents, have done a lot of work for Finland's well-being and independence.	Tätanna Finlo hyj notee Autnavao Tan. Ajof amsi a masi, syklirli ajof mamsi oo tee-en piri tö gö Finlo halivoote a autnavao.
Where does this road lead? Which team is leading the game? Disinformation can mislead us. A leader must lead fairly and successfully.	Kotu tä tul tudiir? Dutajko ögjosio diir in ple? Tarobdafa voo diir ajsi tarobtu (tu tarob). Diirjo piit diir rataflili a hasakli.
What causes narrowing and blockages in blood vessels? There are several reasons for this.	Ko öbsyy, syt intu hemogagevsi uut litobretsi a obyvsi? Intu it oo si sysi.
We have to walk a little longer until we arrive.	Ajsi piit tuut pirnen ipri, tuna ajsi oo obla.
 Finland's currency used to be the markka and the penny, but today the single European currency, the euro and the cent, is used in Finland.	Li Finlo-of rov ooen lynapir marrov a cesikmarrov, nenna oo in Finlo na teo Eurlo-of viofobrov eurov a cesikrov.
If prices and wages generally increase a lot, then the value of money decreases. We can follow the development of the value and purchasing power of money from statistics.	If rovrisi a törovsi yylen tihnali piri, täna rov ro lyy. Ajsi voo dekaa rov ro a äfpo dev ut nodari.
He must answer many questions, such as whether a cheaper product is of equal quality to a more expensive one and who is responsible (liable) for their defects.	Hä piit ook tu si kootesi edkali (e.k.) lireeko lyrovpir to itof vao ylrovpir to a kojo oo in okofo itsiof viksi.
Did you notice when something fell from the high roof? It was a ball that the children threw onto the roof.	Satvokaaenko ja, na ö autlyyen el ylva yltal. It ooen bol, ko ipmämsi heiien le yltal.
The gift was exactly what I wanted, and I couldn't even wait to receive it.	Tofa ooen fulli lioova ajof neraob, a aj ej davooen ipripstli obnoo aaf it.
Factories should be established to manufacture products that are imported in large quantities from abroad.	Piitif bestoo tolösi, in kosi toota itva tosi, kosi inaag piri ut nihylsi.
Move a little further forward so that everyone has the same amount of space!	Louu jasi depirna ipri eddir, syt for ki uut reri piri til!
Vosa is significantly different from all previously created artificial languages. Vosa can be continuously developed better and better, but it should still be frozen at some point in its development at a fundamentally sound level.	Vosa oo pivokali erva il ki lynapir tee-en tevossi. Vosa voota deev pirtuuli repirnen pir, mut amut it piitif tekaalm ösina ob bessysi intu hava devdot.
What movement are you a member of? Movement is medicine, it promotes health and eliminates many ailments.	Ko-of uide ve ja oo? Uo oo termo, it vyrotee tervao a yraap si tesafsi.
Stir the soup, remove the pot from the stove and turn off the power before the soup sticks to the bottom.	Parääj ja kuem, aap ja kuves el kuos a yr sähtuo en na kuem böön ru alo.
There were even poor elderly people without escorts, but we took good care of them.	Jea tesafva unjosi ooen ofvi ejli vigaajosi, mut ajsi hakee-en häsi hali.
It is justice and fairness. You have no right to act like that, they violate human rights.	It oo rataf a obnidrivao. Jasi ei oof rataf otee ätli, itsi ahreek (ögreek) mämratafsi.
The head is a body member. There is a beginning and an end in a line. The writing usually has a title. A sentence has several main clauses and also subordinate clauses.	Pä oo bodev ve . Tujär oof nö a ön. Kir oof tihna päsa. Lusa oof si pälusasi a ali sidlusasi.
What is the game situation, which team is winning?	Ko oo plesta, dutajko ögjosio oo na vin?
Shapes include round, oval, angular, curved, straight, etc.	Kausi oo rauva, ielrauva, ängsiva, iersiva, reiva aid. (a itli depirna).
Esperanto is also an artificial language, but it has few speakers compared to English.	Ali esperanto oo tevos, mut it oof sasaajosi ipri erkaaenna vi eng.
I think she's ordinary in appearance, not very pretty, but not ugly either.	Hä oof öb aj resiva nilika, ej errili kava, mut ej ali akva.
I've already written a lot of sentences, but I need to add a few more pages to this section.	Aj oo kiiren ripnen piri lusasi, mut aj piit pirpaa ipsi kirsidsi intu tä ikoblo.
That summer there was a bountiful blueberry harvest, as well as a lingonberry harvest, and they were easy to find.	Na it lakno ooen siriva bluberafva, reli puolberafva a itsi keesen gnoli.
What field have you studied, what field do you work in? This area is 10 ares.	Ko leiob ja oo apdaaven, la ko leiob ja töö? Täof laori oo 10 (bas) ceskvaängmetrsi.
There was a hole in the area of my eye that distorted letters and images, and it was treated with surgery.	Ajof kaev oofen rekoup la tarkva voka leilo, ko tartee-en kirkasi a kato a it hakee-enta vy retkut.
Do they have good relationships with customers? In mathematics, we calculate with ratio and equation.	Oofko häsi hava vicusi vi sojosi? In risoda risoota vy curi a curilire.
I moved to my current apartment 20 years ago. What bad word derivations in the dictionary could be changed to better ones? Please make suggestions!	Aj oo erlotuuen 20 (dubas) jänsi iten intu ajof nenva elo. Kosi ahvova saderivsi vooif temuu hapir? Oo jasi hava a tee jasi tajsasi!
Who is organizing the event? The writings should be organized into groups according to topics.	Kojosi jäär häp? Kirsi piitif jäär intu iksiosi li obsosi.
He's gotten older-looking since we last met.	Hä oo autmuuen unpir livokava itne, na ajsi önstna ögkaaen.
Whoever is the actual leader, he is the deputy leader.	Kojo oo rilorova diirjo, hä oo resdiirjo.
This week is still a vacation. Next week we should be able to work hard and well again.	Tä gun oo pirnen urtöno. Na denöva gun piitif anen piriteli a hali tee tösi (töö).
When is the last date when the matter can still be handled, please let us know.	Kona oo önva tanri, kona so voota pirnen hakee, dafaa ja it tu ajsi.
Swedish is the second official language of Finland. I have a small wound on my tongue. The kantele's string is broken. He crossed the road. I'm completely broken because I ran so much.	Svid oo Finlo-of duva törova vos. In ajof save oo ipva laevrek. Finkanhöv höknit oo durekli. Hä tuuen inylli tul. Aj oo fulli yrpoli, syfor aj tyyen itli piri.
When we live even more economically, we can save money to build a new house.	Na ajsi ee pirnen rostapirli, itli aj aaf ropaoo rov for novva tol toolte.
A subject that is a person is expressed in Vosa with the -jo ending. A subject that is not a person is expressed with the -jö ending.	Teejo, kojo oo hojo, kautsaata in Vosa vy -jo-önrupa. Teejö, ko ej oo hojo, kautsaata vy -jö-önrupa.
He was a former minister who died yesterday. The end of temporal life can come at any time (anyone) for anyone and eternal eternity begins.	Hä ooen enva pösiojo, kojo eöönen edtanna. Ofnova eo nö voo uut kona sattaj tu kojo sattaj a nöö kinova kikino.
Where is the door out, is it at the end of this corridor or somewhere else?	Koin oo ouv nitu, ooko it in nö tä tuotolik taj öin tuala?
The circumference, diameter, chord, and radius of a circle are geometric terms. I don't have a very large circle of friends, but I do have a lot of acquaintances.	Raukaof rauri, inlipipri, tensväl a katikri oo pipridava daersasi. Aj ei oof errili leileiva havijo rauri, mut vikadajosi oo amut piri.
Apparently he's been prevented from coming somehow. I'll call him and ask.	Klirdali hä oo öli autyyven, na ej oo aftuuen uut. Aj visavöö tu hä a koo.
Many people don't believe until they see, but then it's no longer believing, but seeing.	Si ej uus en na vokaa, mut itna it ejpirnen oo a uuste mut vokaate.
The road condition is poor at this point, and you sometimes have to watch out for potholes when driving by a car.	Tä välla oo tul vosta ahvova, välna piit riskkaa kuolsi, na katuu vy tuvö.
There is a housing association meeting tomorrow, it would be good if there were a lot of participants. The board of directors of the company are not paid a salary, but they could go to one lunch sometime.	Detanna oo tolvirosio visahäp, ooif hava, if ikaapjosi ooif siri. Tu viropöjosio ej rovfaa törov, mut la is midtanem häsi aafif uttuu ösina.
Once upon a time there was a king and a queen and they lived happily ever after. That was the length of this fairy tale.	Ooen a isna roylmä a royläm a häsi ee-en li sakva ättu nö häsiof eo. It luriva ooen tä feösa.
Leaves fall from the trees in autumn. When you have finished reading the magazine, will you give it to me?	Lifsi siautlyy enkalna ut pusi. Na ja oo riiken dapapr, faako ja it itne tu aj?
We still have many milestones to achieve before we reach our goal.	Ajsi piit obaaf pirnen si välobtraosi en na ajsi oo in päob.
The swamp is very large, I was only able to pick up a couple of liters of cloudberry from it, even though I walked all over (crisscrossed) it. Matti and Maija are a newly engaged couple and their wedding is in a month.	Vampul oo errili leileiva, aj aafen utkaapen itel erisli sujli du litrsi vampuljelbersi, tajli aj vetuuen it kroskrosli. Matti a Maija oo novva enbajvividu a häsi oof tebajvihäp ne du hynsi.
Where is the bus station, the train station? He has a good position in the office. My old XP workstation is broken, it turns off by itself almost immediately after starting.	Koin oo siotuvölö, fetultol? Hä oof hava custa in törolö. Ajof vonva KSP-tödaculo oo rekli, it önböön autteli rafli välejnen ne panötuo.
Who will post the announcements on the bulletin board? Everyone should check to see if there are any important announcements there.	Kojo ruu dafatesi le dafa kvaängos? Kaa obki, ooko itla curova dafaatesi.
Employment and unemployment are of great importance to the state's economy. How would you deal with the large unemployment problem?	Töfari a töafejsta oof piva curo tu pöhylof rosta. Koli ja hakeeif piva töafejstaong?
Well, there are many solutions, but decisions are difficult, you need to understand the economy at both the top and bottom levels.	Noa, gnosi oo si, mut pätsi oo ongva, piit dakavoo rosta duvio la yl- a altalsi.
Which road can you use to get (detour) there when the trees have blocked the road during a strong (powerful) storm?	Intuni ko tul itle aftuu rautuu, na pusi oo obyyven tul, na ooen pova pohou.
I didn't find anything wrong with the program even though I tested it for almost an hour, because the program was well made.	Aj ej obvokaaen in prog ejö vik amut it tajli aj votraaen it rafli din, syfor prog ooen hali tee-en.
The mushroom basket is still completely empty, but I wonder if we can find some mushrooms when we navigate the forest to the most likely places where mushrooms grow.	Fungnetboks oo pirnen fulli lufva, mut ejko a aaf fungsi, na dirtuuta in pul le fungsi rilvokast eöpiirlosi.
 We have to start driving right away so we don't arrive too late for the party.	Piit urtuu välejnen katuu, syt ajsi ej uut ylrili ylna tu rono.
How many meters did you run in 12 minutes on the Cooper test during your military service? I ran 3100 meters and got two days off for it.	Siko metrsi ja tyyen in kuuperof vosta in 12 (basdu) censi in sipresjoser? Aj tyyen 3100  (tredisces) metrsi a aafen ut it du tansi urtöno.
Teacher teaches students at school. It would also be a good idea to prepare for self-study and independent information seeking.	Padaavjo padaav davjosi in davlo. Ali intu autapdav a autoteva dasek ooif hava autvodahapiir.
Can you solve the math problem? Start by making a formula, which you then simplify into a suitable form.	Davooko ja gnoo risoteob? Tenöö ja vy tee lika, ko ja itne gnoriip intu soopva kau.
The forest is Finland's green gold, and it is worth investing resources in its proper cultivation and harvesting so that the forest can provide good income and other benefits without damaging the environment.	Pul oo Finlo-of grinva moAu, for ko ratliva viilte a pukaapte rogöö paa resrosi, syt ob pul aaif hali utrovsi a tua göro ejli ahsttee raulo.
May I ask how many children you have, how many girls and boys?	Aafko aj koo, siko ipmämsi jasi oof, siko nossi a sonsi?
Christ died on the cross for all people, atoning for the sins of all. Faith and the forgiveness of sins is a gift from God, which a person should receive in the gospel of the kingdom of God preached in the Holy Spirit, the essence of which is the forgiveness of sins, Otherwise, a person who has lost the faith of a child will be left without part of them (will be deprived of them) and will not be saved. 	Krist oo eöönen kroseön gö ki mämsi, tehasoopen kiof ahosi. Us a ahosi ahhafa oo Hajo-of tofa, ko mäm piitif ögaap in Pyhva Ho ussasaaen Hajo-of pöhyl rossa, ko-of ydin oo ahofapa, tuali ut ipmämof us eöönen hojo jää ikejva ob itsi a ej authovyy.
Do the majority of Russians really accept the current Russian regime's belligerent power policy towards smaller nations?	Hafaako rilli pist ik ob rusjosi nenva Ruslo pöte sipva popögöte obcu ippir hyjsi?
The parties should always sit at the negotiating table, so both parties benefit, and never solve problems with violence.	Iksidsi piitif kina erisli siit tu vilisasoopte laos, itsy dutaj iksidsi autgörooif, a ejna signoo ongsi vy popitpö.

